EX-3105: Added documentation for Experiments Metric Sync CLI + Reorganized Experiments Page (#38127)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/experiments/defining_metrics/metric_sync.md

Reviewer: One thing worth considering: the YAML reference section sits between "Preview and sync changes" and the GitHub Actions example, which breaks up the workflow a bit. Moving the reference section to after the GitHub Actions example would let the task-oriented content flow end-to-end before the reader gets to the reference information.

If you want to go further, I actually think the YAML reference should live as a separate page. The core workflow documented here is self-contained, and the minimal example in "Create a metric definition" gives users enough information to run a real sync.

---
title: Sync Experiment Metrics from YAML
description: Define experiment metrics in YAML, preview changes, and sync them to Datadog from CI.
further_reading:
- link: "/experiments/defining_metrics/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Create Experiment Metrics"
- link: "/experiments/guide/connecting_a_data_warehouse/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Connect a data warehouse"
- link: "/account_management/api-app-keys/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "API and application keys"
---

## Overview

> Experiment metrics define the outcomes you use to evaluate an experiment, such as revenue, conversion rate, or pages viewed. You can create these metrics manually in Datadog, or you can define warehouse-backed metrics in YAML and sync them to Datadog with the Datadog Experiments Metric Sync CLI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Experiment metrics define the outcomes you use to evaluate an experiment, such as revenue, conversion rate, or pages viewed. You can create these metrics manually in Datadog, or you can define warehouse-native metrics in YAML and sync them to Datadog with the Datadog Experiments Metric Sync CLI.
```

```

The install script detects macOS or Linux, downloads the matching GitHub release archive, verifies the SHA-256 checksum, and installs the `metric-sync` binary to `/usr/local/bin`.

To install a specific version or install to a different directory:

```shell
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DataDog/experiments-metric-sync-cli/main/install.sh | env VERSION=v0.1.0 INSTALL_DIR="$HOME/.local/bin" sh
```

Set Datadog credentials with environment variables:

```shell
export DD_API_KEY=<DATADOG_API_KEY>
export DD_APP_KEY=<DATADOG_APPLICATION_KEY>
```

By default, the CLI sends requests to `datadoghq.com`. Set `DD_SITE` if your organization uses a different Datadog site:

```shell
export DD_SITE=datadoghq.eu
```

## Create a metric definition

Create one or more YAML files in your repository. The CLI accepts a file, multiple files, a directory, or multiple directories. When you pass a directory, the CLI recursively discovers YAML files.

The following example defines one warehouse metric source and one simple metric:

```yaml
schema_version: 1
sync_tag: example-checkout
reference_url: https://github.com/example-org/example-repo

> warehouse_connection_id: 00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000

Reviewer 2: If this is required we should explain what it is, where to find it, etc.

warehouse_metric_sources:
  - sync_id: checkout_events
    name: Checkout events
    sql: |
      SELECT user_id, event_timestamp, revenue
      FROM analytics.checkout_events
    timestamp_column: event_timestamp
    subject_types:
      - name: User
        column_name: user_id
    measures:
      - sync_id: revenue
        name: Revenue
        column_name: revenue
        column_type: FLOAT

metrics:
  - sync_id: checkout_revenue
    name: Checkout revenue
    metric_type: simple
    desired_change: METRIC_INCREASES
    simple_metric_aggregation:
      operation: sum
      measure:

>         warehouse_metric_source_sync_id: checkout_events

Reviewer 2: if `metric_sync_id` is unique, could we not infer this? (that's what we do at Eppo)

Author: We do not infer it today. Measure IDs are scoped to a warehouse metric source I think, so `warehouse_metric_source_sync_id` is required to disambiguate the measure reference.

        measure_sync_id: revenue
      timeframe_start_value: 0
```

## Preview and sync changes

Run `plan` before applying changes:

```shell
metric-sync plan ./metrics
```

The plan output shows the operation ID, sync tag, status, and a summary of the changes Datadog would make.

After reviewing the plan, run `execute` to apply the changes:

```shell
metric-sync execute ./metrics
```

`execute` performs local validation, submits a Metric Sync write operation to Datadog, polls until the operation reaches a terminal state, and prints the result summary.

You can also run:

```shell
metric-sync validate ./metrics
metric-sync status <metric_sync_id>
metric-sync result <metric_sync_id>
metric-sync version
```

`validate` only checks the local YAML and does not call Datadog. `status` checks an operation by ID. `result` fetches the terminal plan or execute result. `version` prints build metadata.

## YAML reference

### Top-level fields

| Field | Required | Description |
| ----- | -------- | ----------- |
| `schema_version` | Yes | Must be `1`. |

> | `sync_tag` | Yes | Stable ownership key for this group of metric definitions. All files in one operation must use the same `sync_tag`. |

Reviewer 2: An example / how you use sync tags might be helpful here. Something about how it defines a unique plane for the experiments, so you can use it for syncing different repos from different teams

| `reference_url` | No | URL to the source repository, runbook, or other reference for the synced metrics. |

> | `warehouse_connection_id` | Required when sources omit it | Default warehouse connection ID for all sources in the file. |

Reviewer 2: what does `Required when sources omit it` mean?

`sync_tag` and `sync_id` values must start with an alphanumeric character and can contain alphanumeric characters, underscores, dots, colons, and dashes.

### Options

| Field | Default | Description |
| ----- | ------- | ----------- |
| `is_certified` | `true` | Marks synced metrics as certified. Setting this to `true` requires the Product Analytics Certified Metrics Write permission. |
| `upgrade_mode` | `none` | Controls adoption of existing objects into sync ownership. Supported values are `none`, `by_id`, and `by_name`. |
| `force_delete` | `false` | Allows destructive deletes when supported by the API. |

### Warehouse metric sources

| Field | Required | Description |
| ----- | -------- | ----------- |
| `sync_id` | Yes | Stable identifier for the source within this `sync_tag`. |
| `existing_id` | No | Existing Datadog warehouse metric source ID to adopt or update. |
| `name` | Yes | Display name in Datadog. |
| `description` | No | Description for the source. |
| `sql` | Yes | SQL query that returns the timestamp, subject columns, measures, and properties used by metrics. |
| `timestamp_column` | Yes | Column containing the event or metric timestamp. |

> | `date_partition_column` | No | Optional date partition column used for query optimization. |

Reviewer 2: is this feature implemented in the pipeline? or does it just exist in the data model? 

if it's not implemented we should exclude here

> | `warehouse_connection_id` | No | Warehouse connection ID for this source. Overrides the top-level value. |

Reviewer 2: we don't support multiple warehouse connections today, should omit this for now

| `reference_url` | No | Source-specific reference URL. |
| `force_rebuild_always` | No | Forces dependent warehouse computations to rebuild when the source syncs. |
| `subject_types` | Yes | Subject mappings for the source. |
| `measures` | No | Numeric columns that metrics aggregate. |
| `properties` | No | Columns that can be used for metric filters and breakouts. |

### Subject types

| Field | Required | Description |
| ----- | -------- | ----------- |
| `name` | Yes | Datadog subject type name, such as `User` or `Account`. |
| `column_name` | Yes | SQL result column that contains the subject identifier. |

### Measures and properties

Measures and properties share the same field shape:

| Field | Required | Description |
| ----- | -------- | ----------- |
| `sync_id` | Yes | Stable identifier within the warehouse metric source. |
| `name` | Yes | Display name in Datadog. |
| `column_name` | Yes | SQL result column name. |

> | `column_type` | Yes | Column type. Supported values are `STRING`, `INTEGER`, `FLOAT`, `BOOLEAN`, `DATE`, and `TIMESTAMP`. |

Reviewer 2: I guess these are required in our data model now?

| `description` | No | Description for the measure or property. |

### Metrics

| Field | Required | Description |
| ----- | -------- | ----------- |
| `sync_id` | Yes | Stable identifier for the metric within this `sync_tag`. |
| `existing_id` | No | Existing Datadog metric ID to adopt or update. |
| `name` | Yes | Display name in Datadog. |
| `description` | No | Metric description. |
| `metric_type` | Yes | Supported values are `simple`, `ratio`, and `percentile`. |
| `desired_change` | No | Direction used for experiment interpretation. Supported values are `METRIC_INCREASES` and `METRIC_DECREASES`. |
| `format_as_percent` | No | Displays the metric as a percent. |
| `reference_url` | No | Metric-specific reference URL. |
| `guardrail_cutoff_threshold` | No | Optional guardrail cutoff threshold. |

> For `metric_type: simple`, add `simple_metric_aggregation`. For `metric_type: ratio`, add `ratio_metric_aggregation`. For `metric_type: percentile`, add `percentile_metric_aggregation`.

Reviewer 2: Do we provide a reference for `ratio_metric_aggregation` or `percentile_metric_aggregation` anywhere?

### Simple metric aggregation

| Field | Required | Description |
| ----- | -------- | ----------- |
| `operation` | Yes | Aggregation operation, such as `sum`, `average`, `count`, or `uniqueSubjects`. |
| `measure` | Yes | Measure reference. |
| `timeframe_start_value` | No | Start offset for the metric timeframe. |
| `timeframe_end_value` | No | End offset for the metric timeframe. |
| `timeframe_unit` | No | Timeframe unit. |

> | `property_filters` | No | Filters applied to the metric aggregation. |

Reviewer 2: Should we provide a reference for this?

- A Datadog API key and application key for CI authentication. See [API and application keys][3].

## Install the CLI

Install the latest Metric Sync CLI release:

```shell
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DataDog/experiments-metric-sync-cli/main/install.sh | sh
```

The install script detects macOS or Linux, downloads the matching GitHub release archive, verifies the SHA-256 checksum, and installs the `metric-sync` binary to `/usr/local/bin`. Depending on your system permissions, installing to `/usr/local/bin` may require `sudo`. To install without elevated permissions, set `INSTALL_DIR` to a directory you own.

To install a specific version or install to a different directory:

```shell
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DataDog/experiments-metric-sync-cli/main/install.sh | env VERSION=<VERSION> INSTALL_DIR="$HOME/.local/bin" sh
```

Set Datadog credentials with environment variables:

```shell
export DD_API_KEY=<DATADOG_API_KEY>
export DD_APP_KEY=<DATADOG_APPLICATION_KEY>
```

By default, the CLI sends requests to `datadoghq.com`. Set `DD_SITE` if your organization uses a different Datadog site:

```shell

> export DD_SITE=datadoghq.eu

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export DD_SITE={{< region-param key="dd_site" >}}
```

Reviewer: I recommend using the region-param shortcode as it renders the value based on the reader's selected site region, so the example stays correct for every region rather than showing EU to everyone.

```yaml
schema_version: 1
sync_tag: example-checkout
reference_url: https://github.com/example-org/example-repo
warehouse_connection_id: 00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000

warehouse_metric_sources:
  - sync_id: checkout_events
    name: Checkout events
    sql: |
      SELECT user_id, event_timestamp, revenue
      FROM analytics.checkout_events
    timestamp_column: event_timestamp
    subject_types:
      - name: User
        column_name: user_id
    measures:
      - sync_id: revenue
        name: Revenue
        column_name: revenue
        column_type: FLOAT

metrics:
  - sync_id: checkout_revenue
    name: Checkout revenue
    metric_type: simple
    desired_change: METRIC_INCREASES
    simple_metric_aggregation:
      operation: sum
      measure:
        warehouse_metric_source_sync_id: checkout_events
        measure_sync_id: revenue
      timeframe_start_value: 0
```

## Preview and sync changes

> Run `plan` before applying changes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To preview the changes before applying them, run `plan`:
```

```shell
metric-sync plan ./metrics
```

The plan output shows the operation ID, sync tag, status, and a summary of the changes Datadog would make.

After reviewing the plan, run `execute` to apply the changes:

```shell
metric-sync execute ./metrics
```

> `execute` performs local validation, submits a Metric Sync write operation to Datadog, polls until the operation reaches a terminal state, and prints the result summary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`execute` performs local validation, submits a Metric Sync write operation to Datadog, polls the operation until it reaches a terminal state, and prints the result summary.
```

You can also run:

```shell
metric-sync validate ./metrics
metric-sync status <metric_sync_id>
metric-sync result <metric_sync_id>
metric-sync version
```

> `validate` only checks the local YAML and does not call Datadog. `status` checks an operation by ID. `result` fetches the terminal plan or execute result. `version` prints build metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The commands do the following:

- `validate`: Checks only the local YAML and does not call Datadog.
- `status`: Checks an operation by ID.
- `result`: Fetches the terminal plan or execute result.
- `version`: Prints build metadata.
```

## YAML reference

### Sync tags and IDs

> The `sync_tag` is the ownership boundary for a set of metric definitions. Use a stable `sync_tag` for each repository, team, or metric domain you want to manage independently. For example, a growth team and a checkout team can sync metrics from different repositories by using different `sync_tag` values, such as `growth-metrics` and `checkout-metrics`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `sync_tag` identifies the set of metric definitions that are managed together. Use a stable `sync_tag` for each repository, team, or metric domain that you want to manage independently. For example, a growth team and a checkout team can sync metrics from different repositories by using different `sync_tag` values, such as `growth-metrics` and `checkout-metrics`.
```

> Within a `sync_tag`, each warehouse metric source and metric has a stable `sync_id`. Metric aggregations reference warehouse metric sources by `warehouse_metric_source_sync_id` and measures by `measure_sync_id`. The source ID is required because measure IDs are scoped to their warehouse metric source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within a `sync_tag`, each warehouse metric source and metric has a stable `sync_id`. Metric aggregations use `warehouse_metric_source_sync_id` to reference warehouse metric sources and `measure_sync_id` to reference measures. The source ID is required because measure IDs are scoped to their warehouse metric source.
```

### Top-level fields

| Field | Required | Description |
| ----- | -------- | ----------- |
| `schema_version` | Yes | Must be `1`. |

> | `sync_tag` | Yes | Stable ownership key for this group of metric definitions. All files in one operation must use the same `sync_tag`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `sync_tag` | Yes | Stable ownership key for this group of metric definitions. All files in a single operation must use the same `sync_tag`.<br>Must start with an alphanumeric character and can contain alphanumeric characters, underscores, dots, colons, and dashes. |
```

| `reference_url` | No | URL to the source repository, runbook, or other reference for the synced metrics. |
| `warehouse_connection_id` | Yes | Warehouse connection ID for the organization. |

> | `warehouse_metric_sources` | No | Warehouse SQL models, measures, and properties used by metrics. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `warehouse_metric_sources` | No | Warehouse SQL models, measures, and properties that metrics use. |
```

> | `metrics` | No | Experiment metrics to create, update, or take ownership of so future syncs manage them. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `metrics` | No | Experiment metrics to create, update, or manage in future syncs. |
```

| `options` | No | Sync options such as certification and upgrade behavior. |

> `sync_tag` and `sync_id` values must start with an alphanumeric character and can contain alphanumeric characters, underscores, dots, colons, and dashes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Options

| Field | Default | Description |
| ----- | ------- | ----------- |

> | `is_certified` | `true` | Marks synced metrics as certified. Because the default is `true`, syncing metrics with this option unchanged requires the Product Analytics Certified Metrics Write permission. Set to `false` to skip certification. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `is_certified` | `true` | Marks synced metrics as certified. Because this option defaults to `true`, syncing metrics requires the Product Analytics Certified Metrics Write permission unless you set it to `false`. |
```

> | `upgrade_mode` | `none` | Controls adoption of existing objects into sync ownership. Supported values are `none`, `by_id`, and `by_name`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `upgrade_mode` | `none` | Controls whether existing objects are adopted into sync ownership. Supported values are `none`, `by_id`, and `by_name`. |
```

| `force_delete` | `false` | Allows destructive deletes when supported by the API. |

### Warehouse metric sources

| Field | Required | Description |
| ----- | -------- | ----------- |

> | `sync_id` | Yes | Stable identifier for the source within this `sync_tag`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `sync_id` | Yes | Stable identifier for the source within this `sync_tag`.<br>Must start with an alphanumeric character and can contain alphanumeric characters, underscores, dots, colons, and dashes. |
```

| `name` | Yes | Display name in Datadog. |
| `description` | No | Description for the source. |
| `sql` | Yes | SQL query that returns the timestamp, subject columns, measures, and properties used by metrics. |
| `timestamp_column` | Yes | Column containing the event or metric timestamp. |
| `reference_url` | No | Source-specific reference URL. |
| `subject_types` | Yes | Subject mappings for the source. |
| `measures` | No | Numeric columns that metrics aggregate. |
| `properties` | No | Columns that can be used for metric filters and breakouts. |

### Subject types

| Field | Required | Description |
| ----- | -------- | ----------- |
| `name` | Yes | Datadog subject type name, such as `User` or `Account`. |
| `column_name` | Yes | SQL result column that contains the subject identifier. |

### Measures and properties

Measures and properties share the same field shape:

| Field | Required | Description |
| ----- | -------- | ----------- |
| `sync_id` | Yes | Stable identifier within the warehouse metric source. |
| `name` | Yes | Display name in Datadog. |
| `column_name` | Yes | SQL result column name. |

> | `column_type` | Yes | Column type. Supported values are `STRING`, `INTEGER`, `FLOAT`, `BOOLEAN`, `DATE`, and `TIMESTAMP`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `column_type` | Yes | Required so Datadog can validate the column and show the correct metric configuration options. Supported values are `STRING`, `INTEGER`, `FLOAT`, `BOOLEAN`, `DATE`, and `TIMESTAMP`. |
```

| `description` | No | Description for the measure or property. |

> The `column_type` is required so Datadog can validate the column and show the correct metric configuration options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Metrics

| Field | Required | Description |
| ----- | -------- | ----------- |
| `sync_id` | Yes | Stable identifier for the metric within this `sync_tag`. |
| `existing_id` | No | Existing Datadog metric ID to adopt or update. |
| `name` | Yes | Display name in Datadog. |
| `description` | No | Metric description. |
| `metric_type` | Yes | Supported values are `simple`, `ratio`, and `percentile`. |
| `desired_change` | No | Direction used for experiment interpretation. Supported values are `METRIC_INCREASES` and `METRIC_DECREASES`. |
| `format_as_percent` | No | Displays the metric as a percent. |
| `reference_url` | No | Metric-specific reference URL. |
| `guardrail_cutoff_threshold` | No | Optional guardrail cutoff threshold. |

> For `metric_type: simple`, add `simple_metric_aggregation`. For `metric_type: ratio`, add `ratio_metric_aggregation`. For `metric_type: percentile`, add `percentile_metric_aggregation`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the aggregation field that matches the metric type:

- For `metric_type: simple`, add `simple_metric_aggregation`.
- For `metric_type: ratio`, add `ratio_metric_aggregation`.
- For `metric_type: percentile`, add `percentile_metric_aggregation`.
```

| Field | Required | Description |
| ----- | -------- | ----------- |
| `operation` | Yes | Aggregation operation, such as `sum`, `average`, `count`, or `uniqueSubjects`. |
| `measure` | Yes | Measure reference. |
| `timeframe_start_value` | No | Start offset for the metric timeframe. |
| `timeframe_end_value` | No | End offset for the metric timeframe. |
| `timeframe_unit` | No | Timeframe unit. |
| `property_filters` | No | Filters applied to the metric aggregation. |
| `winsor_lower_percentile` | No | Lower winsorization percentile. |
| `winsor_upper_percentile` | No | Upper winsorization percentile. |
| `winsor_lower_fixed_value` | No | Lower fixed winsorization value. |
| `winsor_upper_fixed_value` | No | Upper fixed winsorization value. |

### Ratio metric aggregation

Use `ratio_metric_aggregation` to define a metric as a numerator divided by a denominator. Both `numerator` and `denominator` use the same fields as `simple_metric_aggregation`.

| Field | Required | Description |
| ----- | -------- | ----------- |
| `numerator` | Yes | Simple metric aggregation used as the numerator. |
| `denominator` | Yes | Simple metric aggregation used as the denominator. |

> ```yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example ratio metric aggregation:

```yaml
```

      measure_sync_id: revenue
  denominator:
    operation: count
    measure:
      warehouse_metric_source_sync_id: checkout_events
      kind: each_record
```

### Percentile metric aggregation

| Field | Required | Description |
| ----- | -------- | ----------- |
| `operation` | Yes | Percentile aggregation operation. Set to `percentile`. |
| `measure` | Yes | Measure reference. |
| `percentile` | Yes | Percentile to calculate, such as `95`. |
| `timeframe_start_value` | No | Start offset for the metric timeframe. |
| `timeframe_end_value` | No | End offset for the metric timeframe. |
| `timeframe_unit` | No | Timeframe unit. |

Example percentile metric aggregation:

```yaml
percentile_metric_aggregation:
  operation: percentile
  percentile: 95
  measure:
    warehouse_metric_source_sync_id: checkout_events
    measure_sync_id: page_load_time
```

### Property filters

Use `property_filters` to restrict a simple aggregation to rows with matching property values:

```yaml
property_filters:
  - property:
      warehouse_metric_source_sync_id: checkout_events
      property_sync_id: country
    operator: IS
    values:
      - US
```

> Supported operators are `IS` and `IS_NOT`. To reference a property from another sync tag, include `warehouse_metric_source_sync_tag`. To reference an existing Datadog property directly, use `warehouse_metric_property_id`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supported operators are `IS` and `IS_NOT`. When referencing a property:

- Include `warehouse_metric_source_sync_tag` to reference a property from another sync tag.
- Use `warehouse_metric_property_id` to reference an existing Datadog property directly.
```
